Chronic lung disease of infancy, often
called bronchopulmonary dysplasia,
is a condition you'll see in premature
infants who needed oxygen or ventilatory support
early in life.
But this isn't just a past problem.
It's an ongoing issue of limited
respiratory reserve.
Here's the key idea.
These infants were born before their lungs
fully developed.
When you combine immature alveoli with
oxygen exposure, positive pressure,
and inflammation, you disrupt normal lung
growth.
Instead of developing many small,
efficient alveoli,
they end up with fewer, larger,
less effective ones, and that means
reduced gas exchange.
Clinically, think patterns.
You'll see tachypnea, retractions, and a
persistent need for oxygen.
These infants often desaturate with
stress, especially feeding.
Why?
Because feeding increases oxygen demand,
and their lungs can't keep
up.
As an RT, your role is all about balance.
You must provide enough oxygen to prevent
hypoxemia, which can
worsen pulmonary hypertension, but avoid
excessive oxygen that contributes to
lung injury.
This is a tight window, and board
questions love testing
that concept.
You'll also monitor ventilation closely.
Rising carbon dioxide, increasing work of
breathing,
apnea, or bradycardia are red flags.
These are not wait-and-see situations.
These are escalate-now moments.
Support strategies include oxygen therapy,
high-flow nasal cannula,
CPAP, or mechanical ventilation if needed.
But remember, the goal is always the least
invasive,
least injurious support that maintains
adequate gas exchange.
Another critical concept is trending.
A single normal SpO2 doesn't mean the
patient is stable.
You're looking at the whole picture—FiO2
needs, work of
breathing, feeding tolerance, growth,
and blood gases.
And don't forget complications.
Pulmonary hypertension is a major concern
in these patients, especially
if hypoxemia is not well-controlled.
So when you see a former preemie with
increasing oxygen needs,
worsening retractions, or feeding
intolerance, think
chronic lung disease of infancy, and act
early.
Bottom line?
This is a disease of limited reserve.
Small changes matter.
Early recognition matters.
And your ability to assess trends and
respond appropriately can make a huge difference
in outcomes.